---
title: "WSL2: A Lightweight Alternative to a Linux Virtual Machine"
excerpt: "Installation and configuration of the Windows Subsystem for Linux"
tags:
  - WSL
  - Linux
  - Ubuntu
  - Shell
  - Windows
  - VM
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
---

<!-- Load in a highlight.js theme for code blocks -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/assets/css/highlight/base16/gruvbox-dark-medium.min.css">

<hr>

<h4 id="introduction" class="article-header-start">Introduction</h4>
<p class="article-text">
  The second major release of the Windows Subsystem for Linux, aptly dubbed WSL2, allows a Linux kernel to run inside a
  low footprint virtual machine on Windows. Support is given for users to install more than one distribution of their
  choice on top, such as Ubuntu, openSUSE, Debian and Kali, all accessible from the same Windows host. As explained in
  the <a class="article-text-link" href="https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/about">WSL documentation</a>, the
  WSL provides users with the capability to:
</p>

<blockquote class="article-text">
  <ul>
    <li>Run common command-line tools such as grep, sed, awk, or other ELF-64 binaries</li>
    <li>Run Bash shell scripts and GNU/Linux command-line applications</li>
    <ul>
      <li>Tools: Vim, Emacs, Tmux</li>
      <li>Languages: NodeJS, Javascript, Python, Ruby, C/C++, C# & F#, Rust, Go, etc</li>
      <li>Services: SSHD, MySQL, Apache, lighttpd, MongoDB, PostgreSQL</li>
    </ul>
    <li>Install additional software using your own GNU/Linux distribution package manager</li>
    <li>Invoke Windows applications using a Unix-like command-line shell</li>
    <li>Invoke GNU/Linux applications on Windows</li>
  </ul>
</blockquote>

<p class="article-text">
  What's great here is that it's possible to have a single Windows Terminal instance running from within Windows, with
  tabs open for a number of different Linux environment command line interfaces.<br><br>

  For those who prefer Linux but also want the freedom to use Windows software with minimal overhead, this is a good
  option to consider. No more switching focus from native Windows to a dedicated Linux virtual machine running in
  VirtualBox; WSL2 allows PowerShell and Bash to both be accessible from within the same program.
</p>

<h4 id="installation">Installation</h4>
<p class="article-text">
  Setting up WSL is straightfoward. Firstly you'll want to enable it as a Windows feature by running the following two
  commands in a terminal:
</p>

<pre class="article-text"><code class="language-powershell">dism.exe /online /enable-feature /featurename:Microsoft-Windows-Subsystem-Linux /all /norestart
dism.exe /online /enable-feature /featurename:VirtualMachinePlatform /all /norestart
</code></pre>

<p class="article-text">
  By default, Windows only has the first major WSL release installed. To use WSL2 you'll need to install it on top and
  set it as the default version. To do so, run this:
</p>

<pre class="article-text"><code class="language-powershell">wsl --set-default-version 2
</code></pre>

<p class="article-text">
  Since <code class="article-text">1</code> will be the only version available on your system, this will return a warning
  message. The message will contain an up-to-date link on where to install the latest version - follow it and go through
  the process. Once done, rerun the original command:
</p>

<pre class="article-text"><code class="language-powershell">wsl --set-default-version 2
</code></pre>

<p class="article-text">
  Now head over to the Microsoft Store and install a distribution of your choosing. Simply search for and install the
  distribution as you would with any other Microsoft Store app.<br><br>

  We're done. Both <code class="article-text">Ubuntu.exe</code> and <code class="article-text">wsl.exe</code> will now
  open a Bash terminal. I recommend updating straight away, as you would with a native Linux install:
</p>

<pre class="article-text"><code class="bash">sudo apt-get update
</code></pre>

<h4 id="importing">Importing an existing WSL setup onto a new machine</h4>
<p class="article-text">
  The <code class="article-text">wsl</code> CLI provides a means to export distribution configurations to tarballs, which
  can then be imported onto new machines. To do this, you'll want to take the name of your distribution and run the export
  command against it:
</p>

<pre class="article-text"><code class="language-powershell">wsl --export {distribution-name} {output-path}
</code></pre>

<p class="article-text">
  Next, carry out a fresh WSL installation on the new machine using the same distribution and version as the one to be
  imported. When the install is done and the Linux terminal prompts creation of a new user, close the window. We want to
  avoid this for now - we'll be importing our existing user later.<br><br>

  On the new machine, locate the <code class="article-text">%LOCALAPPDATA%\Packages</code> folder and find the subfolder
  where the distribution was just installed. If you installed Ubuntu, this may look like:
  <code class="article-text">...\Packages\CanonicalGroupLimited...\LocalState</code>.<br><br>

  Unregister your newly installed distribution by passing this install path into the CLI's
  <code class="article-text">unregister</code> function:
</p>

<pre class="article-text"><code class="language-powershell">wsl --unregister {install-path}
</code></pre>

<p class="article-text">
  This will unregister the new distribution but the leave the Ubuntu Appx package installed. We're now ready to import
  our existing configuration.

  Using your distribution name, the path to your new installation, and the path to the backup you created, run the
  following command:
</p>

<pre class="article-text"><code class="language-powershell">wsl --import {distribution-name} {install-path} {backup-path}
</code></pre>

<p class="article-text">
  One more thing - from a Linux terminal on the new machine, you can set the user from your original distribution to be
  the default on the new one:
</p>

<pre class="article-text"><code class="language-powershell">Ubuntu.exe config --default-user {username}
</code></pre>

<p class="article-text">
  <br><br>
  That wraps up this guide. From here I would recommend looking into how to integrate WSL with your personal tooling.
  VSCode does particularly well here. The
  <a class="article-text-link" href="https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-wsl">Remote - WSL</a>
  extension allows you to use your native editor configuration when working with files stored on your WSL distribution's
  filesystem.<br><br>
</p>
